Hello, everyone.
This video is going to be a very short and quick tangent.
I know I promised that we would work on the login feature in this video, but there's a best practice
that I really want to share with you first.
So this video should be super short and quick, and then we will indeed work on the login feature in
the next video.
All right, let's get started.
So in our previous lesson within this new DB Dogs file, we included our connection string.
Now, clearly, this setup technically works, but from a best practice standpoint, we can do better.
There are two main issues why hard coding something like this in our file is a bad idea.
Number one is just basic security.
So because this connection string includes a username and password, well, we probably want to take
extra care with it.
For example, if you pushed your source code up to a free GitHub account, well, all free GitHub repositories
are publicly viewable.
So in other words, if you posted this repo up to a free GitHub account, then anyone in the world can
now view your MongoDB username and password.
Just a quick update.
This is Brad from December of 2021, and yes, now free GitHub accounts can have private repositories.
Back when I wrote the outline for this original video, free accounts could only create public repos,
but the idea still stands.
You probably don't want to have super sensitive usernames and passwords in your source code on GitHub
at all.
Whether it's a private or public repo.
So that's one reason why you would not want a hard code, something like this.
Another reason is what if we want to connect to a different database?
Depending on the environment in which our app is running?
So, for example, maybe on our personal physical computer right within our development playground,
we would want to connect to one database.
But then maybe when we push our app up onto the web and we're dealing with the real copy that the general
public is going to visit.
In that case, maybe we'd want our app to connect to a different database.
So in short, we would want this to be a different value, depending on the current environment.
Well, this is exactly where something called environment variables come into play.
I think it's easier to simply see an environment variable in action instead of trying to explain it
just with words.
So right now, I want you to follow along with me within the root of our project folder.
I want you to create a brand new file, so new file, and I want you to name this new file.
Dot, E and V so nothing before the dot.
It actually begins with a dot dot EMV.
Within this empty new file, we can create environment variables.
You can name one of these variables whatever you want, but in the programming world, it is a common
convention to name it with all capital letters.
So type this in with me.
Let's create an environment variable named connection string.
Now in this file, we do not use JavaScript syntax, so we don't even include a space after the name
we just say equals.
And then we do not include quotes for a string of text.
You simply start typing your string of text.
So let's do this.
Let's say connection string equals.
And then let's jump back into our DB dogs file and I want you to copy your connection string value into
your clipboard.
So copy that and then back in our new Dot EMV file.
Just paste in your clipboard.
So your new file should look something like this.
Notice there's no quotes around the value.
All right, now, let's go ahead and save this file and then jump back in to DVD jazz at this point,
as you might have guessed.
We no longer want to hard code this value here in these quotes from Mongo client, we instead want to
pull in an environment variable.
Now, in order to easily load an environment variable from our Dot, E and V file, we're going to want
to go out to the JavaScript grocery store or npm and pick up a package so down in your command line.
Press Control, see if your app is currently running and type this command in with me npm install.
And the name of the package is Dot EMV.
This is a super popular package that is downloaded several million times per week.
OK, so npm install dot EMV, then press enter.
All right now up at the very top of our DB D.J.s file, let's do this.
Let's require in that package.
So let's say Konst Dot EMV equals and then just use require so require and its name was dot EMV.
OK, and then on the next line, let's say dot EMV, dot config and config is a method, so parentheses
to call it.
And that's all we need to do as soon as we run config here.
That package is going to load in all of the values that we defined within our Dot EMV file, so it knows
specifically to look for a file named Dot EMV.
And it's going to take care of the rest.
So now when we use Mongo client right here, just hollow out the parentheses, so get rid of the quotes
are value.
Everything just like this and we can just say process, dot, EMV, dot and then the name of the environment
variable.
So we named it all uppercase connection string.
So in the Node.js environment, this is how you access environment variables.
Process, dot, EMV, dot and then the name of the variable.
All right, let's go ahead and save this and take it for a test drive.
So be sure in your command line to fire up your app again.
NPM run watch.
And if I jump into the browser and test my app, maybe if I try to register another user, so username,
cat, email cat.
Cat Gqom, choose a password.
Congrats.
There are no errors, and if I check my MongoDB Atlas account and click Find to refresh the data.
Awesome.
There we see a second document for Cat.
So this means that our application is still working.
It's still able to connect to the database and we have successfully set up environment variables.
Now, practice makes perfect.
So before I explain why this is truly useful and desirable, let's set up one more environment variable.
So, for example, we are telling our app to listen on Port three thousand.
Now that's great for our local development environment, but we might need to listen on a different
port number when we actually push this up to its production or live or real environment that the general
public can visit.
For example, when we pushed our to do app up to Heroku, we needed to use the Heroku approved port
number instead of just hard coding this to always be three thousand.
So let's do this within our Dot EMV file.
Let's add a new line, and let's create another environment variable this time.
Let's name it port.
So let's say port equals.
And then let's just say three thousand.
Let's go ahead and save that.
And then back in our DB tags file on this app.
Listen, line, let's get rid of the hardcoded three thousand and instead say Process Dot EMV dot port.
OK, let's go ahead and save that, and if I go back to the browser and refresh, you can see our home
page is still available.
Cool.
Now let's go back and understand why this is a desirable way to set things up.
So reason number one, let's talk about privacy or security.
So now, even if you post in your source code to a public GitHub account, your MongoDB username and
password would not be leaked because what you could do when you first set up your git repository is
within your dot git ignore file.
You could just say to ignore your Dot EMV file so you would keep a copy of this Dot EMV file on your
personal computer, but you would not include this file within your repository.
OK.
Another reason why this setup is desirable is now it's super easy for your application to change and
adjust, depending on the current environment.
So, for example, these values are great for when we are working on our local development copy and
then when we finish our application and are ready to push it up to Heroku, well, we will just not
push our dot EMV file up to Heroku.
Instead, this would pull in whatever the environment variable.
They've already set port to be within the Heroku environment, and we can just manually create an environment
variable named connection string within our Heroku account.
So this way you're managing the individual environment variables instead of having to change your actual
code.
Right this way, your important values are not hard coded.
Now you can keep all sorts of things in your EMV file.
So, for example, any secret API keys that you're using to connect to third party apps?
They can go in here.
And then when it's time to push your app up to a real hosting environment like Heroku, you just manually
add those environment variables and you can set those up either within the dashboard for Heroku or just
with a simple command line command.
Don't worry, when that time comes, I will walk you through the steps of setting that up.
For the time being, all you need to know is that we are now following the best practice of using environment
variables.
That's going to bring this video to a close.
In our next video, we will indeed get started building the log in functionality.
Let's keep things rolling, and I will see you then.